---
title: "Concerning Fun: Evil Texts Pt. 1, Or: Why They Can't Indict The Cosmos"
hook: Thinking through the notion of evil texts, in- and outside the mythos
image: /media/games_600_400.webp
tags:
  - tv-film
  - tabletop
  - concerning-fun
  - video-games
date: 2023-07-18
draft: false
pinned: false
author: max-dreysse
---
At some point, any well-meaning Lovecraft character, critic, enthusiast or
adaptor has to come up with an approach to the delicate problems posed by evil
texts. When it comes to the former, this strikes us as not very difficult,
conceptually at least. If you’re the unfortunate protagonist of a Lovecraftian
tale and happen to stumble over an edition of the *Necronomicon*, you burn it.
Perhaps, you perform some ancient ritual of purification. What you don’t do is
read, critically engage with, copy, distribute, or, god forbid, adapt the
thing. But what if you aren't, what about outside the mythos, what
about our world? Here, things get complicated. What would an evil text even be?
Contemporary understanding (even Western) would certainly quarrel with the
notion of a text being evil solely because it was written by a “mad Arab.”
Admittedly, none of Lovecraft’s investigators ever suggests that the book is
evil *because* its author was someone painted as a scary foreigner. But racism
is undeniably among the reasons why Lovecraft's texts 'work', why they succeed
in bypassing the reader’s skepticism, why they, despite their absurdity, appear
somewhat plausible (the default reading-subject interpellated by Lovecraft's
fiction is White, academic, and cis-male). Consider also his convenient
omissions of (large parts of) the *Necronomicon*’s content and biographical
information about its author, i.e. any kind of data that would enable ambiguous
readings and risk turning the book’s evilness into a matter of taste. All of
this is necessary because, under normal circumstances, books aren’t considered
capable of being moral agents; they are things. They come with content and
a context of production, including some form of authorship. Books aren’t evil
in any primordial sense and can only “become evil” in so far as they come to
play a part in the evil plots of actual agents, i.e. people. If you’ve read
[the last entry to this
series](https://adaptinglovecraft.com/submission/concerning-fun-some-notes-on-cthulhu-and-natural-history/),
you probably recognize the argument: the modus operandi of the *Necronomicon*
metaphor functions analogously to how I used Cthulhu in regard to climate
change. It is a way of externalizing human agency, of inscribing it into
a non-human thing and pretending it no longer has anything to do with us. The
notion of the evil book is mirrored by that of the passive reader, whose
performance of blasphemous rituals primarily exposes the human lack of agency
in the face of superior evil powers, rather than the human capacity for immoral
choice. A Lovecraftian cultist may be corrupted, but their corruption does not
make them a villain in any immediate sense. Rather, it turns them into
a puppet, one that follows instructions sent to it from the actual evil above
or below. Think, for instance, of how hitting zero sanity points in Chaosium’s
*Call of Cthulhu* (*CoC*) forces players to relinquish control over their
characters, turning the latter into villainous puppets in the DM’s hands. This
“madness” cuts deeper than, say, that of an Ajax in Sophocles: the mad in *CoC*
are bereft not just of their capacity for intentional action, i.e. knowing what
they are doing, but of intention itself, of subjectivity altogether. In the
game, reading “tomes of eldritch lore” stands easily as the most sanity
straining activity, promising knowledge of forgotten spells and other
mysterious Cthulhu stuff in return. Losing the struggle against an evil book in
*CoC* by failing some dice rolls means going insane, which means getting
evicted from your character’s body. Since the player’s *is* the character’s
subjectivity in the game or, at the very least, the possibility for the latter
emerges within the former, the evil book’s victory lies in turning character
into setting, subject into object, human into body. When the lost character
returns as a villain later into the campaign, everybody understands they aren’t
the same person anymore, they aren’t a person at all, really, but an obstacle,
much like their tentacled allies or a forest fire blocking the party’s way back
to safety. They aren’t evil, the power controlling them is.[^1]

Some Lovecraftian texts go one step further and suggest that the failure of
ascribing responsibility to individuals leads to a collapse of morality
altogether. In David Prior’s 2020 film *The Empty Man*, a police chief despairs
over his investigation of a series of occult homicides. At all crime scenes,
cops encounter the same sentence, “The Empty Man made me do it”, written using
the victim’s blood for ink. The problem: there is no missing serial-killer, in
every case the culprit is either the victim themselves, or a person close to
them, seemingly acting out of a sudden delirious episode. By all metrics of
police procedure, the cases are solved, the perpetrators identified. Yet, there
is obviously a third party involved, one that connects these otherwise isolated
cases of individual madness.  But since the ominous “Empty Man” to whom the
guilt is displaced is neither a moral agent nor a judicial subject, unbeknownst
to the cops he’s a kind of eldritch “god” existing outside of time and space,
the police can do nothing but to punish the unfortunate individuals through
whom he acts. The chief ruminates:

“Sure, we can put \[the perpetrators] in prison. But that’s not solving it.
It’s inexplicable. It’s too big. *We can’t indict the cosmos*.”

On the one hand, *The Empty Man* seems to stand as a prime example for the
aforementioned tendency of cosmic horror to externalize human activity and bind
it to a fictional entity beyond our control. The allegorical content of the
film’s cthulhuian antagonist is a social structure naturalized to the point of
becoming an unnegotiable, ahistorical truth of human existence. The dilemma of
police intervention, in the film as in late Capitalism, lies in the social
contingence of crime itself: punishing individuals never gets to the forces
producing violent actors in the first place, elder Gods in the former,
patriarchy/racism/poverty/etc. in the latter. Cops of the neoliberal state can
indict Harvey Weinstein, but just like they can’t indict the cosmos, they can’t
indict Hollywood. On the other hand, the film’s marked surrealism goes a long
way of highlighting the contrivances underlying the modern penal state: it
paints a scenario wherein a crisis of the modern disciplinary regime only
emerges as a consequence of supernatural intervention. In so doing, it raises
the question of why the problem faced by the chief feels so hauntingly familiar
when really, our reality is so different from the one depicted in the film. The
Empty Man objectively resides beyond human grasp, so it is only natural that
state violence should be powerless against him. *But why is it powerless
against Hollywood?* I’d argue that herein lies the reason we must insist that
the *Necronomicon* can only be plausibly evil in fictional space where instead
of humans, all we have are characters, i.e. beings that by their very nature do
not possess any kind of meaningful historical agency – they do what they’re
written to do, and that’s the only reason their reality has a conceptual space
for evil objects. This is a crucial distinction to make, for as Mark Fisher
points out in *Capitalist Realism*, the naturalization of humanity’s non-agency
is a key feature of our contemporary predicament:

“\[We] know things are bad, but more than that, \[we] know \[we] can’t do
anything about it. But that ‘knowledge’, that reflexivity, is not a passive
observation of an already existing state of affairs. It is a self-fulfilling
prophecy” (21).

But I wouldn’t be writing these lines, and this piece’s title wouldn’t bear the
“Part 1” suffix, if there wasn’t a sense in which the notion of evil texts
remained somewhat pertinent even outside of fantasy stories. *Mein Kampf* would
be a particularly stark example. But also, and I don’t mean to imply any degree
of equivalence here, *Herbert West: Reanimator,* a story that has Lovecraft
describe an African American character as a, please excuse me, “loathsome,
gorilla-like thing”. Is calling such texts “evil” necessarily as depoliticizing
as I’ve made it out to be? And if not, what politics might follow from such an
ascription or, in other words, how should we deal with texts we think are evil?
I will return to these questions in the next entry to this series. Thanks for
reading.

- - -

[^1]:
    There is a kind of limited agency involved in deciding whether or not to
    read an evil book in *CoC*, but this is a strategic choice that shouldn’t be
    confused for a moral one: if a character reads the *Necronomicon*, they read it
    because they want to *defeat* evil (i.e. win the game), not because they *are*
    evil – which is to say nothing of the fact that whether you succumb to madness
    ultimately depends less on your decision than on the dice-rolls that follow it.
    Taking the risk here is a move; a risky one, sure, but not an immoral one (see
    [Clint Hocking’s urtext on ludonarrative
    dissonance](https://clicknothing.typepad.com/click_nothing/2007/10/ludonarrative-d.html),
    which deals with this precise dilemma in game design).