---
title: "Concerning Fun: Call of the Sea"
hook: |-
  *Call of the Sea* was developed by Spanish developer *Out of the Blue*
  and published to most platforms in 2020. The game draws heavily from the
  works of H.P. Lovecraft, checking many of the tropes commonly associated
  with the author's fiction, from fishmen and elder gods to occult rituals
  and forgotten civilizations.
image: /media/games_600_400.webp
tags:
  - video-games
  - concerning-fun
date: 2023-05-09
draft: false
pinned: false
author: max-dreysse
---
*Call of the Sea* was developed by Spanish developer *Out of the Blue*
and published to most platforms in 2020. The game draws heavily from the
works of H.P. Lovecraft, checking many of the tropes commonly associated
with the author's fiction, from fishmen and elder gods to occult rituals
and forgotten civilizations. Clocking in at about 4 to 5 hours playtime,
the limited scope of its plot also seems to emulate that of the short
stories that make up much of the game's literary hypotext. This
semblance is accentuated further by *Call of the Sea*'s narrative
structure. The game tells the story of a single expedition to an
unexplored tropical island full of ancient, eldritch mysteries. Its
narration is firmly rooted in the perspective of a first-person
narrator, who, by the end of the game, faces some dramatic revelations
that profoundly change her sense of self as well as the world she
inhabits. But, despite its significant overlaps with many of the texts
that inspired it, *Call of the Sea* constitutes an ambitious adaptation
that reaches for more than mere reproduction of genre tropes (i.e.
fan-service). Its most notable deviations from the Lovecraftian formula
converge around its unique rendering of a trope I like to call the *del
Toro inversion*. Because I take the *del Toro inversion* to be a
relevant concept for the discussion of contemporary Lovecraftian
adaptation at large, and because *Call of the Sea*'s greatest strengths
and weaknesses both revolve around problems that follow from its
employment, I would like to make the game an excuse for me to talk about
the concept at some length. In as much as *Call of the Sea* is
ambitious, I think it also bites off more than it can chew. This essay
will thus conclude with something of a rant, one that has me spew out my
frustration over what the game isn't but might have been.

Named after Guillermo del Toro, the Mexican film director most strongly
associated with it, the *del Toro inversion* sets itself up by
mobilizing the audience's preconceptions of the horrific or monstrous.
An inhumane creature will appear or be hinted at early in the narrative,
triggering a reaction of disgust or fear in the spectator. This
repulsion, however, is produced not to cheaply establish a villain
through the reproduction of potentially harmful stereotypes. Instead, it
serves its own subsequent inversion, as the audience is gradually
invited to empathize for the horrific being, even identify with it. The
monstrous Other, now revealed to be beautiful and empathetic, is then
juxtaposed with the truly scary, namely the human lust for power,
personified in an all-to-familiar individual that serves as the plot's
ultimate villain. The *del Toro inversion*, as exemplified by films such
as David Lynch's *Elephant Man* and del Toro's *Pan's Labyrinth* or *The
Shape of Water*, is a natural fit for Lovecraft adaptation, given the
political baggage that comes with much of the author's symbolism.
Lovecraft famously based much of his work on his assumption that "fear
of the unknown" represents the "oldest and strongest kind of fear." No
wonder then, that many of the locations he tried to paint as scary are
"swarmed" with "swarthy foreigners" and the like. This is where films
like Jordan Peele's *Get Out* intervene, subverting such imagery by
having protagonists straight out of Lovecraft's "unknown", i.e. BIPOC,
face the evils that linger not at the fringes of society, but in
America's ostensible mainstream. Such instances can be read as a
literalization of the *del Toro inversion*: here, the metaphor of the
monstrous is abandoned in favor of an explicit depiction of White
society's Other. Symbolically, the gesture remains the same. In as much
as *Get Out*, *Lovecraft Country*, or *It: Part One* frame the daily
routines of the American middle class as a site of horror, they all seem
to whisper the same subtext: *the monstrous resides not in the abnormal
but in the normal*. Sometimes, readings of such texts will take note of
their perceived Lovecraftianness, an association that is derived from
little else than their negation of tropes associated with the author's
name. "Lovecraft" becomes a metaphor for antiquated, reactionary
traditions of horror fiction, with White college students fending off
voodoo magic, asylum inmates, and transgender serial killers.
Lovecraftianness in these cases serves as a negative quality, one that
is accessible only through interpretation. As a concept, its function is
that of exposing how Cthulhu haunts horror narratives by its mere
absence: in a social order ostensibly enabled by violence against and
horror experienced by people marked as outsiders, the metaphor of the
alien in its configuration as "ultimate threat" becomes dated at best,
and fascist at worst. Much to the bemusement of the critic, this means
that the Lovecraftian sometimes comes to encompass even its own
negation: a text can be Lovecraftian simply by not being Lovecraftian.
The *del Toro inversion* works precisely because it builds on this
truth: the cultivated expectations of the audience hold that the ugly
must also be evil, hence "Lovecraft," a shorthand for all sorts of
backward horror tropes, needn\'t be made explicit to be subverted.

But there is a second reason the *del Toro inversion* is a significant
concept within Lovecraft adaptation, namely the fact that the binary of
inside/outside, along with its ethical implications, also collapses in
Lovecraft's own texts on more than one occasion. Humanity's "placid
island of ignorance" is marked by the belief that we are at the center
of the universe. Lovecraftian angst in turn emerges not just from the
fear of what might linger outside that center, but also, and perhaps
more notably, from the negation of that very belief. What is unsettling
about Lovecraft's fiction in this sense is not so much that it imagines
the invasion of an outsider, but the possibility of us already *being*,
or at the very least *becoming* such an outsider.[^1] Cthulhu in this
reading constitutes not just an outside threat, but also proof that our
agency doesn't matter, that in cosmic terms, humanity will always,
inescapably, inhabit the position of the colonized. We are objects,
playthings really, of the elder gods. This realization represents an
apocalyptic decentering of the default subject position, and it finds
its strongest metaphor in the monstrous transformations at the heart of
Lovecraft\'s stories "The Shadow over Innsmouth" and "The Outsider."
There, the fear of the Other transforms into its opposite: fear of
*being* the Other. Because the protagonists of these stories suddenly
find themselves (with shock!) embodying the very identities they had
previously regarded with disgust, the binary of good vs. evil on whose
inversion texts like *Get Out* are built is thoroughly disrupted: "I am
It -- or better, I am They," as Mark Fisher puts it. The Lovecraft of
such a reading is by no means less reactionary than the one sketched
above, one should note. The horror of decentering transformation too
constitutes a reactionary expression of petite bourgeois anxieties,
anxieties that remain in strong currency even today, when conspiracy
theories prophesize, among other things, the "Great Replacement." But it
does highlight a layer to Lovecraft's work that few adaptations have
tackled so far, one that is arguably more complicated and nuanced than
the ostensibly Lovecraftian notion that "outsiders are dangerous."

It is in this regard then, that *Call of the Sea* could have been
remarkable. Not because it is flawless, not even because it tells a
particularly profound story, but because underlying it is a reading of
Lovecraft that is as interesting as it is underexplored. Like many
contemporary Lovecraftian texts, as well as most texts that feature the
*del Toro inversion*, *Call of the Sea* positions itself in opposition
to a hypotext. But it is what the game thinks is objectionable about
that hypotext that makes it stand out among its peers. Shortly put, its
inversion of Lovecraftian themes is focused less on raising sympathy for
a monster, but on embracing the prospect of becoming one. The
realization that there exists a cosmos beyond the confines of our
"island of ignorance" is thus framed as utopian, rather than
cataclysmic. I am getting ahead of myself though. Let us do some close
reading.

The game's plot focuses on Norah Everhart, a married school teacher
suffering from a mysterious illness that seemingly runs in her family
and promises to kill her sooner rather than later. In his desperation,
her husband, archeologist Harrison "Harry" Everhart, chases every
possible lead in search of a cure, a quest that eventually leads him to
embark on an expedition to a mysterious location somewhere in the
Caribbean. Months later, Norah receives a package with a picture of her
husband and coordinates to an unexplored island near Tahiti. She decides
to travel there, accompanied by intense dreams that feature the
recurring motif of an island which, wouldn't you know it, turns out to
be the very one she is headed towards. We learn most of this by
interacting with photographs and notebooks in Norah\'s ship cabin, the
site of the game's tutorial, and prologue. After this short
introduction, we arrive on the island and the game proper begins.

![Norah's landing site](/media/cots_start.jpg "Norah's landing site")

In a rather linear fashion, Norah gradually uncovers what happened to
Harry and his crew, as well as the history of the ancient civilization
whose otherworldly architecture marks the scenery to this day. As is
soon understood, Harry sought to learn more about the occult rituals
practiced by the island\'s now-vanished inhabitants, because legend has
it they found a way to defeat death itself. From notes and photographs
scattered across the deserted camps left behind by the expedition, Norah
gathers that one by one, Harry's crew succumbed to madness and
eventually even untimely deaths -- initially because of unfortunate
accidents, later at the hands of one another. The downfall of Harry and
his crew constitutes *Call of the Sea*'s Lovecraftianness at its most
conventional, following the structure of *At the Mountains of Madness*
in almost every detail. Norah's presence at the site of her
predecessor's demise, however, causes a profound disruption of this
formula. While concerned about Harry, the protagonist's inquiry is
dominated by her growing sense that she feels "more alive" on the island
than she's ever felt before. Eventually, she learns that the island's
inhabitants were slaves to inhuman masters from the sea, who gradually
took them to a sanctuary where an occult ritual would transform them
into undying fish beings. Naturally (perhaps?), the existence of Deep
Ones horrified Harry and his crew. Norah, on the other hand, is less
disturbed than excited by the revelation. As becomes clear in one of the
game\'s not-so-surprising twists, she is a descendant of the island\'s
original people. Her mysterious affliction is not a disease, but a
symptom of her ongoing transformation. Crucially, this transformation
necessitates the performance of the primordial ritual in the island's
sanctuary: Norah cannot remain human, lest she shares the fate suffered
by her deceased family members.

The reason Norah's presence signals such a signification alteration to
what would otherwise be a fairly formulaic conglomerate of Lovecraftian
tropes is that to her, the island\'s mysteries represent a sliver of
never-before-felt hope. The consequence of her resulting optimism is
first and foremost a subtle shift in the atmosphere. Jules Verne-like
adventure and dreamlike qualities exist across many of Lovecraft's
stories, but his work is predominantly associated nowadays with the
genre of horror. Because Norah is moribund from the get go she has
little to lose and everything to gain from her visit to the island. She
has no reason to be scared, and so the game never gets scary either.
This configuration of Norah's character as adventurer, rather than
horror victim, has tremendous ramifications for the game's Lovecraftian
transformation plot. Her disposition, however, is no coincidence.
Rather, Norah's character design is an almost direct consequence of
*Call of the Sea*'s indebtedness to other industry-defining first-person
point & click adventure games, with Cyan Inc.'s *Myst* series standing
out as a particularly formative source of inspiration. *Call of the Sea*
is arguably at least as *Myst*-erious as it is Lovecraftian.
Consequently, a good chunk of what makes the game stand out from other
Lovecraft adaptations, for better or worse, follows from the unique
interactions between these two textual traditions.

![Lovecraftian architecture needn't be scary](/media/cots_lovecraftian_arch.jpg "Lovecraftian architecture needn't be scary")

To start with the good, *Call of the Sea* profits greatly from its
iteration on some of the strategies *Myst* employs to let players
explore desolate places that are truly strange while at the same time
not being scary. Like *Myst*'s, *Call of the Sea*'s central gameplay
loop revolves around solving puzzles, with larger, semi-open areas
housing one major puzzle that is in turn compartmentalized into
different sub-puzzles that are thematically related. This is admittedly
a little speculative, but the perceptive mode of engaging with a puzzle
game seems to inherently run counter to that of engaging with a horror
game: scanning an environment for clues means you aren't scanning that
environment for threats. Also, the sheer scale of the ominous
architecture, completely devoid of life, might have felt oppressive, if
the game's soundtrack, its colorful visual aesthetic, and especially
Norah's spoken commentary didn't frame it all as positively intriguing.
All of this, excepting only Norah's commentary, feels directly taken out
of *Myst*, but within the context of a thoroughly Lovecraftian tale. The
latter thus undergoes the aforementioned shift in tone*: Call of the
Sea*'s ancient civilization becomes a site of wonder, rather than
terror, and the prospect of transformation a prize to be won, rather
than a sinister fate to be dreaded. When this works, it allows *Call of
the Sea* to reproduce its ludic hypotext's eerie sense of mystery and
adventure. When it doesn't, which unfortunately happens all too
frequently, the game cracks. The biggest problems here derive from the
game's attempts to marry *Myst*-erious open spaces with a very
non-ambiguous narrative, as well as with contemporary industry
conventions. Where *Myst* can afford to leave many of its mysteries
unresolved, *Call of the Sea* seems hellbent on explaining what the
thing in front of you at any given point "means". There are layers to
this issue. For starters, Norah is a very video-gamey protagonist who
constantly berates the player with hints of the \"I should have another
look at that object by the waterfall\"-sort. This Norah is necessarily
always correct since her function is that of a failsafe against players
getting stuck. Such handholding is "necessary" in ludic terms because
contemporary video games apparently cannot afford irregularities in
their pacing. Norah's reliability, however, is also conferred to the
many instances when she gives diegetic input. Because we are conditioned
to trust her remarks, her interpretations of the evocative scenery, such
as her prehistoric ancestors' ominous murals, render obsolete any
interpretation on the player's part. This is not an accident, but a
consequence of *Call of the Sea* knowing exactly what it wants to be
about as a narrative. Thus, the mural in front of you cannot remain
mysterious, it has to be a depiction of an occult ritual whose
participants emerge from it as immortal fish beings. One can't help but
feel like the game's excellent world design would have justified a more
confident approach to the voice-acting script. Given Norah's isolation
on the island, her constant stating of the obvious, voicing of what the
player sees anyhow, and especially her incessant explanations, all feel
unnecessarily awkward. Worse still, her monologues frustratingly reduce
the beautifully sculpted setting to banality, with her words forcing
unsatisfying, one-dimensional resolutions to the far more interesting
questions raised by the otherworldly scenery. Strikingly, the *Myst*
formula as well as the Lovecraftianness underlying *Call of the Sea* are
both detrimentally affected by this problem, which only goes to show how
neatly the two might have conversed under slightly different
circumstances. Such potentialities could be explored via Fisher's
terminological pairing of the Eerie and the Weird, given how *Myst*'s
unnaturally empty spaces emphasize the former (\"failure of presence\"),
and Lovecraft's aliens the latter (\"presence of that which does not
belong\"). Put a pin in that thought, we might return to it at a later
point throughout this series.

The above nagging notwithstanding, *Call of the Sea*'s specific
arrangement of the tropes it borrows largely succeeds in framing Norah's
encounter with the Other, which in the end turns out to be very
familiar, as intriguing, and at times even beautiful. As the plot
approaches its finale, the puzzles increasingly come to feature
underwater sequences, wherein Norah temporarily transforms into the
alien shape that is at this point established to be her ultimate fate.

![Transformation](/media/cots_transformation.jpg "Transformation")

Set against her limited mobility on land, where not even a jump button
exists, the 3-dimensionality of her submerged movement options
accentuates the freedom promised by the prospect of life under-sea.
Progress through the game's narrative is not just marked by Norah's own
race to the center of the island, however, but also by that of Harry's
expedition. By the time she arrives at the Sanctuary, the latter's
traces have shown that only two crewmembers made it this far into the
island's interior: Harry and Cassandra, an ambitious reporter. Upon
entering the holy site of the ritual, Norah finds a dead body, mutated
to the point of being completely unrecognizable, with Harry's glasses
beside it. After a very short spell of desperation over her husband's
demise another dream sequence has Norah realize that the corpse is
really that of Cassandra who, desiring immortality, tried to kill Harry
and perform the ritual. The transformation, however, does not work for
everyone, proving lethal if performed by any but those who share a
lineage with the original islanders. Having been witness to Cassandra's
gruesome death, Harry understood that he cannot be with Norah: only she
can undergo the ritual, and if she isn't to die, undergo it she must.
Not wanting Norah to choose a life by his side over her own well-being,
he placed his glasses next to Cassandra's corpse to fake his own death.
He then escaped from the island to send Norah the package which launched
her adventure and, so he hoped, her path to salvation. Having learned of
her husband\'s ultimate sacrifice, Norah is led into a dreamy version of
what is presumably the couple's home.

![Dreamhouse](/media/cots_dreamhouse.png "Dreamhouse")

To proceed, she has to leave her dream through one of two doors. "I
can't let you make this decision for me," Norah says. One door thus
reads "Accept your fate and leave Harry" (which Norah comments with
"Either I embrace my fate and accept what I've always been and leave you
behind, . . ."), the other "Reject your fate and return home" (". . . or
I reject it and return home with you to relish the time that my illness
gives us"). Depending on player choice, the game ends with one of two
available final cutscenes: One has Norah transform and swim out into the
ocean, the other has her leave the island via boat, with the implication
that she returns to Harry to live out the short remainder of her
disease-ridden life at his side. A short post-credits scene that plays
either way then has an aged Harry contemplate whether he made the right
choice in lying to Norah all those years ago.

![Norah and Harry](/media/cots_norah_harry.jpg "Norah and Harry")

The game thus closes with a series of reflections on the human capacity
for choice, i.e. on the nature of agency. Norah has been following clues
left behind by Harry all this time, just like the player has been
playing through a thoroughly linear campaign. At the very end, Norah
finally has to make a choice of her own. Her emancipation, we ought to
note, is not mirrored by that of the player, who simply gets to choose
one of two prewritten endings. But the problems with Norah's decision
run deeper than some clunky metatextuality. I introduced the notion of
the *del Toro inversion* above because I feel like it illustrates quite
nicely what *Call of the Sea* might have been. To reiterate, the *del
Toro inversion* flips the binary of evil outside versus good inside on
its head. For the trope to work, we need two things: an outside that is
eventually embraced, and an inside that is eventually estranged. In
*Call of the Sea*, both seemingly exist. Norah is a woman living in the
1930s who finds herself incapable of living within the bourgeois
institution of marriage. Her husband, concerned for her health, goes out
into the world to try and save her -- unsuccessfully -- while she stays
home, presumably to take care of the household. What seems like a
disease while she is stuck in her White American middle-class
environment, however, is eventually revealed to be a kind of superpower
once she leaves that context. The realization that there is a life to be
had outside of humanity's "placid island of ignorance," makes her feel
"more alive" than she ever has before. You know of course where I'm
going with this: *Call of the Sea* is *this* close to imagining a
Lovecraftian coming-out narrative.

This *other* narrative would frame the society Norah stems from as a
place where she cannot be her true self and must eventually perish
because of it. The subsequent realization that this society is not all
there is to the universe, a very Lovecraftian realization one might add,
is then, naturally, perceived as utopian. *This* narrative would treat
Norah's "disease" as a metaphor, one that signals how some of the things
we are taught to regard as flaws really make us who we are. The sea
creatures, in turn, would be representative of the communities we are
taught to regard with disgust, but which become safe havens to the ones
daring enough to allow themselves to be transformed. Transformation,
meanwhile, could be any kind of identity-affirming act, from coming out
to surgery. But, unfortunately, *Call of the Sea*'s narrative is not
that. Because the game suggests Norah\'s ultimate decision constitutes
an exercise of free will, we have to assume that both options are
equally plausible. This means that both endings are equally valid
consequences of the person Norah is at the time she makes her choice.
Put differently, the player does not get to choose who Norah is, only
what her decision in this particular situation will be: the Norah who
chooses to go into the Sea must be the same person as the one who would
rather die than leave her husband. If we try and read this split
characterization as a metaphor, the whole thing falls apart: Accepting
her transformation yields immortality for Norah, i.e. complete
material/economic security forever, staying married yields death, i.e.
security's opposite. This juxtaposition doesn't make for a (good)
metaphorical rendering of the deliberations unhappily married housewives
in the America of the 1930s presumably faced. But of course, the
"unhappily married" bit is hard to reconcile with *Call of the Sea*'s
insistence on the purity of Norah's marriage anyhow. This leads me to
another problem I have with the game. The island *Call of the Sea* is
set on is a liminal space, a bone-house taken straight out of Vladimir
Propp, very literally a place that people go to in order to come away
from it transformed. By restricting its narrative to this "outside"
setting, the game cannot be properly Weird to begin with: its world is
too otherworldly from the start. *Call of the Sea*'s fantastical
elements don't invade into a space that is convincingly "normal", in
fact I'd argue the "1930s" of the game are really just part of a visual
aesthetic rather than an actual historical setting. Our main relation to
life back home, ostensibly to the American society of the 1930s, is
through Norah and Harry's love story. But this love story is so
exaggerated, so cliché ridden, that it feels more closely related to
romantic genre fiction than to the rigid, hyperrealist materialism so
central to the disposition of Lovecraft's protagonists. I don't mean to
insinuate that the game is worse for failing to live up to my personal
standards of fidelity to Lovecraft's work, but to suggest that it
corners in all the wrong places. By "wrong" I mean that the game ends up
being about nothing, at least not in any coherent sense. Norah revolts
against society, but she also doesn't. This society meanwhile is ours,
but it also isn't. The game is about agency and emancipation, but it
also undermines player agency by presenting a scripted binary as
freedom.

[^1]: A similar, albeit not identical argument, appears in Fisher's *The
    Weird and The Eerie*, as well as Hbomberguy's video essay
    *Outsiders: How to Adapt Lovecraft in the 21^st^ Century*.
