---
title: "Sticky Cthulhu, or: Lovecraftian Fun for the Whole Family"
hook: What’s more fun than getting rammed by a boat? Throwing sticky rubber
  tentacles at cardboard monsters while you try to keep your seven-year old from
  tentacling his little sister. Just like Lovecraft would have wanted.
image: /media/sticky-cthulhu-englisch.jpg
tags:
  - tabletop
  - comment
date: 2023-08-16
draft: true
pinned: false
author: tim-lanzendoerfer
---
Alright, so this is early in this site’s history and already we might seem to be getting desperate. But bear with me: I think there’re a few interesting things to say here, even if we’re talking about a board game in which you sling rubber tentacles at cardboard, and also at each other.

Here’s a brief rundown: in *Sticky Cthulhu*, each player gets one (sometimes two) green soft rubber tentacles, with a wide flipper at the end. Before you, you place thirty cardboard monster tokens in five different colors, and also five investigator tokens. Then you roll the dice: they come up with a kind of monster (all Lovecraftian) and a color; and now your job is to use the tentacle to grab that specific monster, without also grabbing an investigator. The round ends when the monster is in your hands—so while it’s just stuck to your tentacle, it’s still fair game. Hilarity ensures (genuinely) until someone cries, usually one of your kids, or you’ve succeeded in doing this five times to collect five “Deep Ones” tokens. First to five Deep Ones wins!

There’s probably not a whole lot of need here to unravel this. Or to make sense of it. Or much of a chance to make it “work” as a “faithful” adaptation of Lovecraft. But I was stuck on it (pun perhaps intended) recently because it’s so…well, bizarre? I mean: this is a kid’s game. It’s fun, no doubt. But it’s fun because you play it with kids, and because at some point, you’re crawling on the floor hunting the pieces you’ve inevitably shot off the table with a tentacle. There’s no plot, really—nothing driving the action but the action itself.

So why do [the rules](http://boardgame.bg/sticky%20ctulhu%20rules.pdf) storify this? Because it’s not just that you shoot tentacles at monsters here: you shoot them at monsters that are currently disturbing the sleep of Cthulhu, so you need to “\[t]hrow your tentacles to grab the Creature bothering your master” (3). So these are not Cthulhu’s tentacles, they are yours! And the various monsters (largely unrelated except by proxy to Cthulhu himself) annoy him, so presumably you remove them from his presence. But you cannot capture investigators because “Cthulhu hates them! (7). Not sure why that would not removing them desirable. Also, not sure why Deep Ones are tokens of winning. (Ugh; so I did start to unravel this.) None of this makes much sense: it’s an excuse for playing a game in which you slap rubber tentacles around.

But why any excuse, and then, why this excuse? Or, more properly, what does this excuse do? It’s a striking point (perhaps someone has explored it) that contemporary games frequently lean into story in order to motivate their game play. *Ludo*, of course, does not. Neither does *Chess*. Nor, for that matter, does *Settlers of Catan*. In these games, while sometimes the gameplay itself is suggestive of a plot, as in Catan, you simply play a game on the basis of its rules, and it works fine. So would *Sticky Cthulhu* work fine without the Lovecraftian background.

The obvious point here is that *Sticky Cthulhu* is a Lovecraftian adaptation in order to make me, and presumably you, but you specifically, as someone who’s visiting a website about Lovecraft, buy it. If you need to motivate a sticky tentacle, this could have been a game about frogs catching insects, say—perhaps that might even have been a better pitch to my seven-year old. The pitch, of course, is to me, not him. In fact, even though he briefly voiced interest in getting behind the reasoning for the monsters and the pronounciation of the name, all that got swiftly replaced by the joy of slapping a rubber tentacle in his sister’s face. (Like Cthulhu himself, he quickly became unconcerned with the plight of mere mortals, at least, that is, until I threatened him with a time out if he did it again.)

But my point here may be that in its effort to make sense, in the broadest understanding of the term, of the ways in which the Mythos interlinks with the slappy tentacles of the game, the impulse to adapt is present weirdly. Take, for instance, the idea of the “investigators.” I already noted that it really makes no sense, sorry for trying, that you—the faithful servant of Cthulhu—should only be permitted to remove an annoyance to Cthulhu if you don’t grab an investigator. Why should you care? Would Cthulhu care? (Like “What would Jesus do,” a perfect question to live your life by?) But more pointedly: why “investigators”? Even in the logic of the game, these cardboard pieces do not “investigate” anything: they are literally just there to produce fail states in the iterations of the game play loop. And in Lovecraft as such, there is no such entity as an “investigator,” either. There are individual characters who might be fairly said to investigate things, but unlike, say, the detective in Agatha Christie, or the love interest in Barbara Cartland, these characters don’t really cohere as a class.

They become investigators only in the wake of the success of the *Call of Cthulhu* roleplaying game and its own adaptations, foremost in the context of Lovecraftian board games the *Arkham Horror* franchise. Here, playable characters become investigators, one might say, for two reasons: first, because the purpose of the game often indeed is to investigate a mystery; second, to make it easier to refer to all player characters at once without losing track of the investment of the game in story. In *Arkham Horror*, of course, that story does in fact make sense: it’s a role-playing game of a sort, after all, and for those, story is vital. There, I mean, it’s not enough to just have game mechanics: for the gamers’ investment in its complicated rules and complex game play loop, it’s probably necessary to have the mythos as grounds. Or, put differently: no-one’s going to invest their time in a game like *Arkham Horror* without storyfication.

But so ubiquitous has the specific storyfication of the Cthulhu mythos apparently become in board gaming, anyway, that even a game as pointlessly storyfied as *Sticky Cthulhu* can just simply reference the idea of the Lovecraftian “investigator” as the opponent of the Great Old Ones. You could have had a fail-state for grabbing a piece of Cthulhu’s prized collection of Dwarven bread, or accidentally swinging at his buttocks. But you don’t: you’re caught in the larger mythos’s gamified minor mythos, whether it makes any sense or not. *Sticky Cthulhu* seems precariously balanced on a thin eldritch line, in this regard: it bets that it’ll be to its sales benefit to shout out to parents: hey, this is how you can make your kids like Lovecraft, just like you do! It also bets that because it’s a children’s game, you’re not going to say: but you know, we can’t play this, it really makes no sense. They got you coming and going: you want it because it says “Cthulhu”; you keep it because it’s fun to slap tentacles at your kids’ faces and pretend you just missed the cardboard monster.

At the same time, it’s a minor lesson in the self-perpetuation of story-world adaptation. Lovecraft didn’t know that Francis Wayland Thurston of “Call of Cthulhu,” “Shadow over Innsmouth”’s Robert Olmstead, or Albert N. Wilmarth of “The Whisperer in Darkness” were “investigators,” because, well, they weren’t. But starting with *Call of Cthulhu*, they started to become (I’ve cited this [elsewhere](https://adaptinglovecraft.com/submission/arkham-horror-fiction-fourth-order-adaptation/)), and with *Arkham Horror*, this seems to have fully turn into *the* concept through which we understand the (good) human characters in Lovecraftian (board game?) adaptation. It’s always a bit weird; it’s most weird when those investigators dangle limply from the end of a rubber tentacle that just barely missed your face.