---
title: The Bestiary of Dusk, a Lovecraftian Love Letter
hook: The Bestiary of Dusk is an artful homage to Lovecraft as weaver of Dreams,
  as an author questioning our limited perception of reality and sanity.
  Lovecraft himself is turned character in this bande dessinée...
image: /media/comics_600_400.webp
tags:
  - comics
date: 2023-05-21
draft: false
pinned: false
author: aurelien-buchatz
---
The Bestiary of Dusk is an artful homage to Lovecraft as weaver of
Dreams, as an author questioning our limited perception of reality and
sanity. Lovecraft himself is turned character in this bande dessinée,
warden of the supernatural against which he protects visitors to the
park he works at. Visually astounding, as pastel colors of the unnatural
seep into the grey reality, distorting it in the process, it also
incorporates a Lovecraft short story into the later part of the
narrative, tying it to the magic of the Other Side of this urban park.

A wonderful, awe-inspiring journey for cultists of all ages.

For about five years I have been following a page on Facebook titled
'H.P. Lovecraft Italia'. I'll save the story of that group for another
article, it's a whole thing. Only spoiler is that this page catalogues
what the author thinks is the extended lovecraftian universe, ranging
far beyond the canonical works of the author into the stretched abysses
of dark fantasy and cosmic horror post-H.P. Lovecraft. And memes!

One post in late February 2023 featured the Demiurge (creator of this
online Lovecraft cult, followers of the page being its cultists) holding
up a book, whose cover featured a man leaning on an umbrella, his scarf
to the wind, walking on the path in a forest. Eyeballs are scattered
throughout the grass on the side of that lighter path, and the figure
seems lost in thoughts, contemplative, his gaze reaching far into the
distance, ignoring the elephant-sized fishes swimming in the air right
above him. The woods, the path, the man are all shades of black and
white while the two koi fishes are a purple shade of pink laced with
turquoise dark green. Perfect encapsulation of the beauty to come.

![](/media/bdc_book.jpg)

In the post, the Demiurge praises to high heavens or, rather, to the
Great Inscrutable Beyond, the skills of Daria Schmitt, a French comic
book author who, in her 'Le Bestiaire du Crepuscule' ('Il Bestiario del
Crepuscolo' in Italian, 'The Monstrous Dreams of Mr.Providence' in
English), draws the complex life of H.P. Lovecraft, as 'Mr. Providence'
(fitting, for Lovecraft identified so closely with the city he never
left that his headstone reads 'I am Providence').

![](/media/bdc_epitaph.jpg)

> This epitaph was taken directly from one of the author's letters.

Mr. Providence is a caretaker at an ordinary city park during the day
turned phantasmagorical at night, he is sworn to protect the park's
visitors against the darkness and its creatures, without garnering much
help from his skeptical corporate-minded manager.

The story is more fantasy than Lovecraft ever wrote. What gives
Lovecraft such cachet, such credence to his work, is the habitual use of
a skeptical first person. Usually gruff scientists, extremely dismissive
of supernatural elements, striving to rationalize the actions of madmen
and robed figures prophesizing imminent cosmic doom. Little of that
skepticism exists here, as the main character embraces Dreams and the
supernatural from the very first pages.

It can be argued that since Providence (the character) stands for
Lovecraft the author, he is depicted as knowing guardian of arcane
dangers, exorcising otherworldly aberrations by writing, learning about
them. As such, this work can be seen as Lovecraft introduced to a
younger audience used to fantasy. That trope of a character able to see
the supernatural protecting the rationally minded 'others' oblivious to
the dangers surrounding them is a recurring one, and here, is rather
well-executed.

The comic book opens with a Lovecraft quote: "There are twists of time
and space, of vision and reality, which only a dreamer can divine",
the opening sequence depicting Providence half-asleep on a mountain of
giant trumpet pitchers that could swallow him whole in their cones.
Where the comic book shines is in its graphic depiction of the dream
world, of the supernatural, blended with 'reality', blurring that line
in perfect lovecraftian fashion.

Adapting the words of Lovecraft to visual mediums has been a rather
hazardous affair, attempted hundreds of times since the old master
unleashed his disturbing visions upon the world, and, arguably, almost
always failed to reach the literary heights of the original works.
Lovecraft's horror, or unease, lies at that frail threshold between
vivid, lavish description, the gaps therein, and the limits of the
reader's imagination. As detailed as Lovecraft could be in his
depictions of cosmic horrors, it is truly in the creeping, indescribable
horror and the descent into madness of his characters, this blurring of
the line between rational reality and supernatural experiences, that
Lovecraft's creations thrived.

Especially in the earlier days of cinema, depicting Cthulhu as an
oversized octopus didn't really generate the same fear and existential
dread as reading about the extensive original cosmic lore.

More than an attempt to bridge that gap, and to better visually depict
that flair, this comic book is an ode to Lovecraft the author, rather
than his works. To Lovecraft as a dreamer, lost in vistas
incomprehensible to his family and peers, leaving him isolated and
socially inept, a tortured artist bound to his very own 'reality' he
strove to recreate with his quill, or typewriter rather. To Lovecraft as
guardian of the supernatural literally protecting 'us', his readers, or
the park's visitors in the comic book, from the infringing, threatening
otherness.

Here is the rather thin plot of the comic book, or rather, the plot
being a thinly veiled excuse to indulge in stunning visual
representations of the supernatural, in introducing Lovecraft's short
story 'The Strange High House in the Mist', fully replicated in the last
quarter of the comic.

What makes this work so visually enticing is the contrast between
'reality' and the supernatural. Daria Schmitt portrays the former in
shades of gray, where, at times and unbeknownst to most of its rational
inhabitants, phantasmagorical entities, constructs, and effects all
painted in the most eerie and unnatural of pastel colors, literally seep
into the page, as in this full page panel where Providence investigates
disquieting changes in the park's trees after supernatural events start
occurring in the park, and tentacles dripping colorful ooze spread
through the vegetation.

![Page 73](/media/bdc_page73.jpg)

Only Providence and his cat (Maldoror, not sure about the English
translation for this name, 'mal' being 'evil' and 'doror' a blend of
'horror' and 'douleur', or 'pain', but anything will be better than what
Lovecraft infamously christened his own) see through the mist and
perceive these entrancing colours (from out of space, sorry for the
cheap reference, couldn't help myself).

As Providence tries to understand and contain the supernatural phenomena
occurring in the park, he stumbles upon a book half destroyed by the
lake and attempts to dry and restore it. Further along in the story, a
man masquerading as health inspector reveals himself to be part of a
cult yearning to reclaim that very book, along with his many goons.

What would be homage to Lovecraft without an apparition by Cthulhu? As
preternatural events intensify, Providence is drawn to the Great Old One
itself, appearing threateningly in the middle of the lake, in its most
majestic pastel blue, and fushia hues.

![Page 82](/media/bdc_page82.jpg)

As the book is nursed back to health by Providence, it takes center page
in the story and accelerates the corruption of the park, most
specifically the lake, enveloped in a thick colored mist, the band of
kids playing around it turning into the Deep Ones from Innsmouth, and a
Cthulhu-like figure appearing in the eye of the vortex at the center of
the lake, beckoning Providence forward, to join them underwater or
forever doom this world.

Providence then walks alone through corridors and porphyry staircases
underneath the lake, all preternaturally absent of water, before seeing
a house perched on a rocky pyre in the middle of a secret lake (within
the lake). There, drawn by the house, he is joined by his cat Maldoror
and his countless brethren, who offer to fly him to the house, where he
forever vanishes from the story, leaving behind him only a book, serving
as metaphorical resignation letter to the park manager and to reality.

The book is found by the manager, who takes it on her to read it, and
there is printed in full, Lovecraft's short story 'The Strange House in
the Mist', with gorgeous colored illustrations, shifting from the grey
reality of the book to an incredible, dream-like double-paged opening
that simply has to be shown here.

![Page 101](/media/bdc_page101.jpg)
![Page 102](/media/bdc_page102.jpg)
![Page 103](/media/bdc_page103.jpg)

In those illustrations, Providence takes the place of Thomas Olney,
narrator and main character of the short story, a 'philosopher' (again
that trope of a learned man/scientist investigating the supernatural)
visiting the town of Kingsport, Massachussets, where he is drawn to the
titular house perched high atop a cliff inaccessible by mankind yet
seemingly inhabited, judging by the lights illuminating the abode at
night.

The comic book ends a few pages after the short story is read, with the
manager chasing away another inspector, as she defends the memory of
Providence and we are shown a final supernatural frenzy upon the lake,
with the suggestion that the beautiful colors of the unreal are
disappearing with Providence, who escaped to the world of dreams, to the
'other' reality.

Beyond its visual fireworks (some of these pages belong ~~in a museum~~
on the walls of a student dorm), this comic book is a love letter to the
supernatural, to literature and its power to help readers escape their
drab reality, through Lovecraft, one of the most distinctive voices for
the eerie and supernatural in the literary canon.

Directly incorporating a Lovecraft short story in a new narrative like
this is something I have rarely seen in the myriad Lovecraft adaptions I
suffered through. In this specific instance it begs the question of the
chicken or the egg regarding Daria Schmitt's creative process: was she
so enthralled by the short story she illustrated it and grew a narrative
around it, or was she writing the story of this comic book and decided
to insert the short story inside it?

Although it matters little, I am leaning towards the latter here, as the
place of the short story within the narrative feels contrived,
especially with the comic book ending so abruptly afterwards. This
forced insertion of the Strange High House in the Mist in the narrative
would be my main gripe with the Bestiary of Dusk, but all in all, it
remains a minor flaw that doesn't deter too much from the artistry and
understanding of both Lovecraft's writing and Lovecraft as a writer.

The Bestiary of Dusk is a well-crafted love letter to dreams and the
supernatural. It differs in tone from Lovecraft's work and as such,
might be targeting a different, younger audience than Lovecraft,
bringing his vision to those who could otherwise not appreciate it as
much. The visual effervescence of the dream aspects leaves the reader
wistful and contemplative, like many of Lovecraft's characters, getting
lost in the otherworldly beauty, the vibrant unnatural pastels
transcending the greys of reason.

I know I will occasionally be driven back to this comic book, to read
again and again, but chiefly, to immerse myself in those panels and
pages, especially the colored ones of the High House, dozens of them
crafted with the care of a detail-obsessed painter. If you're anything
like me, dear reader, I'd highly recommend checking up for yourself if
that style is one you're prone to lose yourself into.

And if so, well, don't hesitate much and just jump in!